docs: restructure simulation/emulation and expand config logic chapter (#953)
FPGA-Research/FABulous: docs/source/user_guide/building_doc/configuration.md

(fabric-configuration)=
# Fabric configuration

FABulous fabrics offer a 32-bit wide configuration port which can either be driven directly by e.g. a CPU or bus or by the two currently implemented configuration adapters, allowing the transmission over UART and a custom bitbang protocol.

## Parallel Port

Configuration data is written directly into the fabric through a 32-bit
parallel port, rather than shifted in bit-serially. This is the main configuration interface which is also used by the UART and bitbang configuration adapters.

- **Signals:** `SelfWriteData` (32-bit data bus), `SelfWriteStrobe` (write strobe)
- **Bus width:** 32 bits — each transfer loads 4 bytes of the bitstream
- **Timing:** Data must be valid on the bus for at least one clock cycle before `SelfWriteStrobe` is asserted, and held stable while the strobe is high.

## Configuration Adapters

To allow configuration from outside of a chip, currently two configuration adapters are implemented, allowing to upload a bitstream using a UART or a custom bitstream protocol.

###  UART

> The configuration is sent to the fabric bit-by-bit over a UARTlink on `Rx (since the adapter does not transmit anything, it's technically just a "UAR")`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration is sent to the fabric bit-by-bit over a UART link on `Rx` (since the adapter does not transmit anything, it's technically just a "UAR")`,
```

decoded, and assembled into 32-bit words that feed the configuration port.

- **Signals:** `Rx` (UART input), `WriteData` (32-bit, shared with parallel

>   write path), `WriteStrobe`, `Command` (decoded command byte), `ComActive`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Signals:** `Rx` (UART input), `WriteData` (32-bit, output to the parallel
config port), `WriteStrobe`, `Command` (decoded command byte), `ComActive`,
```

  `ReceiveLED`
- **Frame format:** standard UART frame — 1 start bit, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit
- **Baud rate:** set by `ComRate = f_CLK / Baudrate` (default `217`, e.g. 25 MHz / 115200 baud)
- **Encoding modes:** `auto`, `hex` (2 ASCII hex chars per byte), or `bin`
  (raw byte), selected by the `Mode` parameter or auto-detected from the
  command byte
- **Framing:** each transfer begins with a fixed ID header and a command
  byte before data bytes are accepted
- **Word assembly:** 4 received bytes are packed into one `WriteData` word,
  then `WriteStrobe` pulses once per word, as the configuration interface expects
- **Integrity check:** a running checksum is accumulated over the data and
  validated against an expected checksum value
- **Timeout:** an inactivity timeout resets the receiver to idle if no data
  arrives mid-transfer

### Bitbang

The bitbang adapter offers a quick asynchronous serial configuration port interface that is ideal for configuring the fabric via a microcontroller. The idea of the protocol is as follows:

:::{figure} ./figs/bitbang1.*
:align: center
:alt: Bitbang description
:::

> 

Reviewer: - **Signals:** `s_clk` (protocol clock), `s_data` (data line), `data` (32-bit, output to the parallel
  config port), `strobe`, `active`
- **Protocol:** sample bitstream data on the rising edge of `s_clk`, sample control data on the falling edge of `s_clk`
- **Word assembly:** 4 received bytes are packed into one `data` word,
  then `strobe` pulses once per word, as the configuration interface expects

decoded, and assembled into 32-bit words that feed the same write interface
used by Parallel mode.

- **Signals:** `Rx` (UART input), `WriteData` (32-bit, shared with parallel
  write path), `WriteStrobe`, `Command` (decoded command byte), `ComActive`,
  `ReceiveLED`
- **Frame format:** standard UART frame — 1 start bit, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit
- **Baud rate:** set by `ComRate = f_CLK / Baudrate` (default `217`, e.g. 25 MHz / 115200 baud)
- **Encoding modes:** `auto`, `hex` (2 ASCII hex chars per byte), or `bin`
  (raw byte), selected by the `Mode` parameter or auto-detected from the
  command byte
- **Framing:** each transfer begins with a fixed ID header and a command
  byte before data bytes are accepted
- **Word assembly:** 4 received bytes are packed into one `WriteData` word,
  then `WriteStrobe` pulses once per word — matching the Parallel-mode timing
- **Integrity check:** a running checksum is accumulated over the data and
  validated against an expected checksum value
- **Timeout:** an inactivity timeout resets the receiver to idle if no data
  arrives mid-transfer

## Bitbang configuration port (To be supported in the testbench)

> 

Reviewer: Also add the signal, timing etc here like for the config interface and the UART adapter?

We have produced a quick asynchronous serial configuration port interface that is ideal for microcontroller configuration. It uses the original CPU interface that we have in our TSMC chip. The idea of the protocol is as follows:

:::{figure} ./figs/bitbang1.*
:align: center
:alt: Bitbang description

> :::

Reviewer: As mentioned in #209 this figure is not correct. To my shame I never actually replaced it.
